Modalities 4 TENS and IFC Lecture PT 9111 Foundations in Physical Therapy Instructor: Prof. Troy Seely PT, MScPT, DPT, FCAMPT © Troy Seely, 2024 Outline 1.Indications for electrical stimulation to treat pain. 2.Indications/comparisons of various TENS settings and uses. 3.Understand what IFC is, and specific parameters affiliated with it. 4.Electrode size, placement and type. © Troy Seely, 2024 History of Electrical Current Rx •“Faradization” The unit shown is similar t o that used by Benjamin Franklin as a means of pain relief. © Troy Seely, 2024 History of Electrical Current Rx • The development of electrostatic generators in the eighteenth century increased the use of medical electricity. • Decline in the 19th and early 20th owing to variable clinical results and the development of pharmacological treatments • That is until – Melzack and Wall (1965) © Troy Seely, 2023 Class Exercise Red, Blue, Purple, Green, Brown Green, Blue, Red, Pur ple, Brown Green, Red, Brown, Blue, Purple Blue, Purple, Red, Brown, Green Distrait, Distratto, Distrahert, Distraje, Ablenkung © Troy Seely, 2023 What is TENS? • The use of electrical stimulation for pain control has traditionally been called “TENS” = transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation. • TENS application can be used to elicit sensory analgesia or endogenous opiate liberation. © Troy Seely, 2024 Sensory Analgesia • Analgesia = the absence of pain or noxious stimuli • Sensory Analgesia = stimulation of A-beta nerves to cause a tingling sensation that may affect the gating mechanism at the spinal cord. © Troy Seely, 2024 * Stubbed toe analogy* © Troy Seely, 2024 Sensory Analgesia • Gate Control Theory of Pain • The sensation produced affects the gating mechanism at the spinal cord level so pain impulses are not transmitted to the higher centers. • Pain is transmitted along small myelinated A-delta fibres and small unmyelinated C fi bres, and the tolerable stimulus blocks their pain impulses. © Troy Seely, 2024 Conventional TENS • Duration: Short pulses (50-100 µs) • Frequency: High (80-100 pps) • Intensity: Comfortable sensation (tingling) • Location: Locally, dermatome,contralateral • Response: Immediate • Session: Up to 24 hours • Modulate: Frequency, Pulse dur, Amplitude © Troy Seely, 2024 Conventional TENS • Accommodation from a decrease in the frequency of action potentials (along th e A-beta fibers) due to decreased excitability of nerve membrane to repeated stimulation. • Conventional TENS benefits from the application of modulation. © Troy Seely, 2024 Endogenous Opiate Liberation • Endogenous = something from within or that is developed from internal systems. • Opiates = drugs containing opium or its derivatives and are used in medicine for inducing sleep and relieving pain. • Target of TENS in this scenario is the ability of the body to produce and release strong pain-relieving substances. © Troy Seely, 2024 Endogenous Opiate Liberation • Stimulation by the parameters described affect the production of endorphins and enkephalin release that mimic the action of narcotic drugs. • Endorphins and enkephalins are endogenous opiates, with a half life of 4 hours and 2 minutes respectively. • Treatment goals for use of TENS with patients with chronic pain may emphasize functional ability while keeping pain symptoms at a manag eable level. © Troy Seely, 2024 Acupuncture-Like TENS • Duration: Long pulses (150-200 µs) • Frequency: Low (2-10 pps) • Intensity: To visible muscle contraction • Location: Motor, acup, trigger point • Response: 20-30 min after, for 1-4 hours • Session: Should not exceed 30 min • Modulation: No © Troy Seely, 2024 Comparing TENS settings © Troy Seely, 2024 Comparing TENS settings • Conventional • Low Freq • Burst Mode • Brief Intense © Troy Seely, 2024 What i s IFC? • Interferential current (IFC) was developed in the 1950s , became increasingly popular in the 1970s. • What is it? • The transcutaneous application of two separate mediumfrequency alternating currents • The electrical currents vary in relation to one another in amplitude or frequency, or both. © Troy Seely, 2024 “Medium” Frequency ? • Low frequency – TENS (range 0-1000Hz) • Medium Frequency – IFC ( range 1000 - 100,000 Hz) © Troy Seely, 2024 “Medium” Frequency ? • There is an inverse relationship that exists between the resistance of the skin and the frequency of the electrical stimulation: • Skin resistance at 50 pps is approx. 3200 ohms • Skin resistance at 4000 pps is reduced to appox. 40 ohms. © Troy Seely, 2024 Is it popular ? • IFC is reported to be one of the most popular and commonly used form of electrotherapy in Canada, Europe and Australia ( Nussbaun 2017, Robertson 2006) • In terms of conditions treated with IFC, 91% of resp ondents to one survey use IFC for pain (Johnson&Tabasam 1998) • IFC has also been used to treat swelling, accelerate tissue healing, increase blood flow, and promote muscle strengthening. © Troy Seely, 2024 Two major questions about IFC • 1- Does the current research support the use of IFC as a valid treatment choice in the treatment of pain and other clinical issues? • 2-Is IFC a singular, distinctive form of treatment, or simply another type of TENS application? © Troy See ly, 2024 How is IFC produced? • To produce IFC one has to mix two slightly out-of-phase medium-frequency currents one current is normally fixed frequency(ie 5000), the other may be adjustable (ie: between 5000 and 5100Hz). • When the two asynchronous sinusoidal currents are directed to intersect or interfere, the waves are periodically in synch or in phase with each other, and the amplitudes of the two currents will sum together. © Troy Seely, 2024 Alternating Current D efinition:the uninterrupted Bi-directional movement of electrically charged particles Stimulator + _ no net charge 0 – + – + current flows in one direction and then switches to the opposite direction © Troy Seely, 2024 Interferential Current (IFC) Quadripolar cross fire set up © Troy Seely, 2024 Interferential Current (IFC) • As the two currents go in and out of synch, the amplitude of the interference current gradually increase and decreases. Because of the modulati on of amplitude, IFC is referred to as amplitude modulated AC. • This produces the interference effect for which this modality was given its name. © Troy Seely, 2024 Quadripolar Electrode Placement • 4 electrodes • used to cause current produced by two circuits to interact • actually two bipolar circuit • set up in cross over orientation Cathode (-) active © Troy Seely, 2024 Resulting Current • The resulting current will have a frequency equal to the mean of the two original currents.(5000Hz + 5100Hz divided by 2, resulting current will be ________) • Answer : 5050Hz © Troy Seely, 2024 Beat Frequency • The beat frequency will vary at a frequency equal to the difference between these two currents (5100 Hz minus 5000 Hz will be _______) • Answer: 100 Hz •This result is known as the currents’ beat frequency. © Troy Seely, 2024 Why is beat frequency important? • Beat frequency is traditionally considered to be the effect component of IFC , mimicking low-frequency currents and creating differential stimulation of nerve and tissue types. •It is sometimes termed “Amplitude modulated frequency” or “AMP” if amplitude is the factor variable in the two currents. © Troy Seely, 2024 Theory behind Beat Frequency • The theory of IFC is that the medium frequency component simply act as ‘carrier’ currents, bringing the low-frequency beat frequency into the tissues. • Lower beat frequencies are used for APL chronic pain and higher beat frequencies for conventional acute pain. © Troy Seely, 2024 Beat Frequency BF= 100 Hz: Ch1= 4000;Ch2=4100 BF= 50Hz: Ch1= 4000; Ch2=4050 BF= 10Hz: Ch1= 4000; Ch2=4010 Lower Beat Frequency APL like TENS Chronic Pain Higher Beat Frequency Conventional TENS Acute Pain © Troy Seely, 2024 Research and IFC • It has been demonstrated that alteration of the beat frequencies has little effect on the threshold activation of sensory, motor, and pain responses. (Kinnunen & Alasaarela, 2004) • In addition the omission of beat frequency displayed similar effects to when beat frequency was used. (Palmer et al, 1999) • Therefore, the medium frequency component of IFC, and not beat frequency, was the dominant stimulating parameter. © Troy Seely, 2024 Beat Frequency still matters •The patients’ subjective responses induced by IFC stimulation change with different settings (Palmer et al, 1999) • Low BF = beating, tapping • High BF = buzzing • This proposes that the body can distinguish between high and low BF settings with 5 Hz being significantly more uncomfortable that 50 or 100Hz. © Troy Seely, 2024 Conclusion on Beat Frequency • Recent evidence has questioned the importance of the beat frequency. • Most participants appear to prefer higher(50-100Hz) to lower 5Hz. •It’s difficult, and perhaps unnecessary, to recommend a beat frequency. • Initially it is best to use one that is most comfortable for the patient and evaluate effect of treatment. © Troy Seely, 2024 Frequency Sweep • Beat frequency is altered over time by setting the sweep between two prefixed BF (example between 50 and 100 Hz) • This rate of change on some units can also be adjusted. • The sweep has been shown to reduce accommodation and allow stimulation of a greater range of excitable tissues. (Johnson,1999) © Troy Seely, 2024 Vector Scan • To increase the area of the interference and stimulate greater tissue area, modu lation of the interfered currents can be used. • Vector scan is the modulation of the amplitude of one or both of the input currents, resulting in a rhythmic change in position of the interference pattern. This is depicted as an oscillating clover-leaf shape. © Troy Seely, 2024 Vector Scan Vector Scan: Ch1:Ch2 even current spread © Troy Seely, 2024 IFC - parameters 1 – Frequency Sweep ( ex: Range: 0-10 Hz; 80-100Hz) 2- Vector Scan (degree of movement, speed of moveme nt) To offset Accommodation © Troy Seely, 2024 Demonstrated IFC benefits • Pain Relief • Chen et al., 2022 Knee OA pain • Eslamian et al., 2020 Hemiplegic shoulder pain • Albornoz-Cabello et al. 2017, Raijfur et al. 2017, and Lara-Paloma et al., 2013 chronic non-specific low back pain • Albornoz-Cabello et al. 2019 chronic neck pain © Troy Seely, 2024 Can I put it over spinal nerve roots? • Yes! • In fact, Hurley et al in 2001 demonstrated that in people with low back pai n the application of IFC over spinal nerve roots showed better improvement in functional disability than when applied to the painful area. © Troy Seely, 2024 Mechanisms of IFC benefits • Neural Effects – IFC has been shown to stimulate larger-diameter sensory nerves. • No direct evidence has been shown for pain suppression through stimulation of A-delta and c-fibers. (Palmer et al, 2004) © Troy Seely, 2024 Other benefits -Swelling • On the topic of swelling, conclusive publi shed evidence of the influence of IFC on swelling is limited. • Jarit et al (2003) found benefit in swelling in patients who had anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction, menisectomy or knee chondroplasty. © Troy Seely, 2024 Other benefits -Swelling • (Jarit cont’d) But the treatment was applied 3 times per day for 28 minutes each time over the course of 7-9 weeks with a portable unit in their home, while they were also performing the standard home exercise program © Troy Seely, 2024 Other benefits -Swelling • Noble et al (2000b) found no overall effects of a range of IFC settings (10-20 HZ, 10-100HZ, 80-100HZ, placebo and control) on cutaneous blood flow, although there was a short-lived increase in the 10-20 Hz group after 12 minutes. © Troy Seely, 2024 Other benefits -Swelling • The use of suction electrodes over flat carbon-rubber electrodes has been claimed to stimulate cutaneous nerves and affect blood flow(Low,2000) • ? Action o n autonomic nervous system to alter circulation(Olson et al 1999) © Troy Seely, 2024 Application of IFC • Current intensity – strong but comfortable sensation • Treatment time 10-20 minutes • Higher risk of burn if the effect size of the electrode is reduced by poor contact with the skin. • Care must be taken to ensure even current density through equally damp electrodes covers and good skin-electrode contact. © Troy Seely, 2024 IFC and TENS • Some literature equates IFC wi th TENS, carrying with it the assumption that the stimulus characteristics of the two modalities are comparable. • IFC certainly does not follow the very clear frequency-dependent effects displayed by TENS, suggesting that beat frequency does not in fact mimic low-frequency stimulation. © Troy Seely, 2024 Two major questions about IFC • 1- Does the current research support the use of IFC as a valid treatment choice in the treatment of pain and other clinical issues? • 2-Is IF C a singular, distinctive form of treatment, or simply another type of TENS application? © Troy Seely, 2024 Electrode Size Small Electrodes High current density Less comfortable High resistance Superficial More specific Large Electrodes Low current density More comfortable Low resistance Deeper but less specific © Troy Seely, 2024 Applications - Electrode Size Large Electrode Small Electrode © Troy Seely, 2024 Electrode Distance Close: Superficial Far apart: De eper © Troy Seely, 2024 Characteristics of a Good Electrode? • Good conductors • Non toxic • Inexpensive • Disposable • Comfortable • Sizable • Examples: carbon, aluminum foil, hydrogels © Troy Seely, 2024 Compare Electrode Types Carbon • Time consuming application • May be displaced with movement • Difficult to secure over shoulders, hips • Non uniform pressure • Can be decontaminated Self Adhesive • Less conductive • Rapid loss of conductance uniformity • Unpleasant removal • Allergies? • Individual patient use • Relatively expensive • More likely skin irritation © Troy Seely, 2024 